.TH ARIA_READ_LOG "1" "May 2014" "aria_read_log Ver 1.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
aria_read_log \- display Aria log file contents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aria_read_log
\fIOPTIONS\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
Display and apply log records from a Aria transaction log
found in the current directory (for now)
.PP
Note: Aria is compiled without \fB\-DIDENTICAL_PAGES_AFTER_RECOVERY\fR
which means that the table files are not byte\-to\-byte identical to
files created during normal execution. This should be ok, except for
test scripts that tries to compare files before and after recovery.
.PP
You need to use one of \fB\-d\fR or \fB\-a\fR
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-apply\fR
Apply log to tables: modifies tables! you should make a
backup first!  Displays a lot of information if not run
with \fB\-\-silent\fR
.TP
\fB\-\-character\-sets\-dir\fR=\fIname\fR
Directory where character sets are.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-check\fR
if \fB\-\-display\-only\fR, check if record is fully readable (for
debugging)
.TP
\fB\-#\fR, \fB\-\-debug\fR[=\fIname\fR]
Output debug log. Often the argument is 'd:t:o,filename'.
.TP
\fB\-\-force\-crash=\fR#
Force crash after # recovery events
.TP
\fB\-?\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Display this help and exit.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-display\-only\fR
display brief info read from records' header
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-end\-lsn=\fR#
Stop applying at this lsn. If end\-lsn is used, UNDO:s
will not be applied
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-aria\-log\-dir\-path\fR=\fIname\fR
Path to the directory where to store transactional log
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-page\-buffer\-size=\fR#
The size of the buffer used for index blocks for Aria
tables
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-start\-from\-lsn=\fR#
Start reading log from this lsn
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-start\-from\-checkpoint\fR
Start applying from last checkpoint
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-silent\fR
Print less information during apply/undo phase
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-tables\-to\-redo\fR=\fIname\fR
List of tables sepearated with , that we should apply
REDO on. Use this if you only want to recover some tables
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-tmpdir\fR=\fIname\fR
Path for temporary files. Multiple paths can be
specified, separated by colon (:)
.TP
\fB\-\-translog\-buffer\-size=\fR#
The size of the buffer used for transaction log for Aria
tables
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-undo\fR
Apply UNDO records to tables. (disable with
\fB\-\-disable\-undo\fR)
(Defaults to on; use \fB\-\-skip\-undo\fR to disable.)
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Print more information during apply/undo phase
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print version and exit.
.PP
Default options are read from the following files in the given order:
\fB/etc/my.cnf /etc/mysql/my.cnf ~/.my.cnf\fR
.PP
The following groups are read: \fBaria_read_log\fR
.PP
The following options may be given as the first argument:
.TP
\fB\-\-print\-defaults\fR
Print the program argument list and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-defaults\fR
Don't read default options from any option file.
.TP
\fB\-\-defaults\-file=\fR#
Only read default options from the given file #.
.TP
\fB\-\-defaults\-extra\-file=\fR#
Read this file after the global files are read.
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBmyisamlog(1)\fR
.PP
For more information, please refer to the MariaDB Knowledge Base,
which is available online at http://mariadb.com/kb/
