.TH ISAMCHK 1 "19 December 2000"
.SH NAME
.BR isamchk
 \- Description, check and repair of ISAM tables.
Used without options all tables on the command will be checked for errors
.SH USAGE
isamchk [OPTIONS] tables[.ISM]
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B isamchk
.RB [  \-a | \-\-analyze ]
.RB [  \-# | \-\-debug=...  ]
.RB [  \-\-character\-sets\-dir=...]
.RB [  \-C | \-\-default\-character\-set=...]
.RB [  \-d | \-\-description  ]
.RB [  \-e | \-\-extend\-check  ]
.RB [  \-f | \-\-force  ]      
.RB [  \-? | \-\-help       ]   
.RB [  \-i | \-\-information  ]
.RB [  \-k | \-\-keys\-used=#   ]
.RB [  \-l | \-\-no\-symlinks]   
.RB [  \-q | \-\-quick      ]  
.RB [  \-r | \-\-recover       ]
.RB [  \-o | \-\-safe\-recover  ]
.RB [  \-O | "\-\-set\-variable var=option"]
.RB [  \-s | \-\-silent ]      
.RB [  \-S | \-\-sort\-index    ]
.RB [  \-R | \-\-sort\-records=#]
.RB [  \-u | \-\-unpack       ]
.RB [  \-v | \-\-verbose  ]    
.RB [  \-V | \-\-version ]    
.RB [  \-w | \-\-wait ]         
.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP
.BR  \-a | \-\-analyze
Analyze distribution of keys. Will make some joins in
MySQL faster.
.TP 
.BR  \-# | \-\-debug=...
Output debug log. Often this is 'd:t:o ,filename`
.TP 
.BR \-\-character\-sets\-dir=...
Directory where character sets are
.TP 
.BR  \-C | \-\-default\-character\-set=...
Set the default character set
.TP 
.BR    \-d | \-\-description
Prints some information about table.
.TP 
.BR    \-e | \-\-extend\-check
Check the table VERY thoroughly.  One need use this
only in extreme cases as isamchk should normally find
all errors even without this switch
.TP 
.BR    \-f | \-\-force
Overwrite old temporary files.
If one uses \-f when checking tables (running isamchk
without \-r), isamchk will automatically restart with
\-r on any wrong table.
.TP 
.BR    \-? | \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP 
.BR    \-i | \-\-information
Print statistics information about the table
.TP 
.BR    \-k | \-\-keys\-used=#   
Used with '\-r'. Tell ISAM to update only the first
# keys.  This can be used to get faster inserts!
.TP 
.BR    \-l | \-\-no\-symlinks   
Do not follow symbolic links when repairing. Normally
isamchk repairs the table a symlink points at.
.TP 
.BR    \-q | \-\-quick
Used with \-r to get a faster repair. (The data file
isn't touched.) One can give a second '\-q' to force
isamchk to modify the original datafile.
.TP 
.BR    \-r | \-\-recover
Can fix almost anything except unique keys that aren't
unique.
.TP 
.BR    \-o | \-\-safe\-recover  
Uses old recovery method; slower than '\-r' but can
handle a couple of cases that '\-r' cannot handle.
.TP 
.BR    \-O | " \-\-set\-variable var=option "
Change the value of a variable.
.TP 
.BR    \-s | \-\-silent
Only print errors.  One can use two \-s to make isamchk
very silent
.TP 
.BR    \-S | \-\-sort\-index
Sort index blocks.  This speeds up 'read\-next' in
applications
.TP 
.BR    \-R | \-\-sort\-records=#
Sort records according to an index.  This makes your
data much more localized and may speed up things
(It may be VERY slow to do a sort the first time!)
.TP 
.BR    \-u | \-\-unpack
Unpack file packed with pack_isam.
.TP 
.BR    \-v | \-\-verbose
Print more information. This can be used with
\-d and \-e. Use many \-v for more verbosity!
.TP 
.BR    \-V | \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP 
.BR    \-w | \-\-wait
Wait if table is locked.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
isamchk (1),
isamlog (1),
mysqlaccess (1),
mysqladmin (1),
mysqlbug (1),
mysqld (1),
mysqldump (1),
mysqlshow (1),
msql2mysql (1),
perror (1),
replace (1),
safe_mysqld (1),
which1 (1),
zap (1),
.SH AUTHOR
Ver 1.0, distribution 3.23.29a
Michael (Monty) Widenius (monty@tcx.se),
TCX Datakonsult AB (http://www.tcx.se).
This software comes with no warranty.
Manual page by L. (Kill-9) Pedersen 
(kill-9@kill\-9.dk), Mercurmedia Data Model Architect /
system developer (http://www.mercurmedia.com)

.\" end of man page
