.TH MYSQL 1 "13 June 1997"
.SH NAME
mysql \- text-based client for mysqld, a SQL-based relational database daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mysql
.RB [ \-B | \-\-batch ]
.RB [ \-# | \-\-debug=
.IR logfile ]
.RB [ \-T | \-\-debug-info ]
.RB [ \-e | \-\-exec=
.IR command ]
.RB [ \-f | \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-? | \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-h | \-\-host=
.IR hostname ]
.RB [ \-n | \-\-unbuffered ]
.RB [ \-p[pwd] ]
.RI [ \-\-password=[pwd] ]
.RB [ \-P | \-\-port=
.IR pnum ]
.RB [ \-q | \-\-quick ]
.RB [ \-r | \-\-raw ]
.RB [ \-s | \-\-silent ]
.RB [ \-S | \-\-socket=
.IR snum ]
.RB [ \-u | \-\-user=
.IR uname ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-verbose ]
.RB [ \-V | \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-w | \-\-wait ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.IR mysql
program provides a curses-based interface to the SQL-based database
server daemon,
.IR mysqld (1).
Full fuller documentation, refer to the HTML documents installed with
the package.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-B | \-\-batch
Print results with a tab as separator,
each row on a new line.
.TP
\fB\-#\fP|\fB\-\-debug=\fP\fIlogfile\fP
Employ the specified debug log.
.TP
.BR \-T | \-\-debug-info
Print debug information upon exiting.
.TP
\fB\-e | \-\-exec=\fP\fPcommand\fP
Execute the specified command and quit
.BR ( \-\-batch
is implicit).
.TP
.BR \-f | \-\-force
Continue even if the face of a SQL error.
.TP
.BR \-? | \-\-help
Display a help message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP|\fP\-\-host=\fP\fIhostname\fP
Connect to the specified host.
.TP
.BR \-n | \-\-unbuffered
Flush the buffer after each query.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP|\fB\-\-password\fP[\fB=\fP\fIpwd\fP]
Employ the specified password when connecting to the database server.
If a password is not supplied, it will be requested interactively.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR|\fB\-\-port=\fP\fIpnum\fP
Employ the specified port number for connecting to the database server.
.TP
.BR \-q | \-\-quick
Do not cache the result; print it row by row.
This may slow down the server if the output is suspended.
.TP
.BR \-r | \-\-raw
Write fields without conversion.
(used with
.BR \-\-batch ).
.TP
.BR \-s | \-\-silent
Silent mode: reduce the amount of output.
.TP
\fB\-S\fP|\fB\-\-socket=\fP\fIsnum\fP
Employ the specified socket file for connecting to the database server.
.TP
\fB\-u\fP|\fB\-\-user=\fP\fIuname\fP
Employ the specified user name for logging in to the server.
.TP
.BR \-v | \-\-verbose
Verbose mode: write more
Specifying this option
.I twice
produces a tabular output format.
.TP
.BR \-V | \-\-version
Print the
.I mysql
version number and exit.
.TP
.BR \-w | \-\-wait
Wait and retry if the database server connection is down.
.SH FILES
.TP 2.2i
.I /depot/bin/mysql
executable
.TP
.I /depot/bin/mysqld
executable
.TP
.I /depot/bin/safe_mysqld
executable shell script for starting mysqld safely
.TP
.I /site/var/mysql/data
location of database files
.SH "SEE ALSO"
isamchk (1),
isamlog (1),
mysqlaccess (1),
mysqladmin (1),
mysqlbug (1),
mysqld (1),
mysqldump (1),
mysqlshow (1),
msql2mysql (1),
perror (1),
replace (1),
safe_mysqld (1),
which1 (1),
zap (1),
.SH AUTHOR
Ver 6.3, distribution 3.20.20
Michael (Monty) Widenius (monty@tcx.se),
TCX Datakonsult AB (http://www.tcx.se).
This software comes with no warranty.
Manual page by R. P. C. Rodgers,
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communication,
U.S. National Library of Medicine
(rodgers@nlm.nih.gov).
.\" end of man page
