.TH MYSQLD_MULTI  1 "20 December 2000" 
.SH NAME 
mysqld_multi  - is meant for managing several mysqld processes running in different UNIX sockets and TCP/IP ports. 
.SH USAGE 
mysqld_multi [OPTIONS] {start|stop|report} [GNR,GNR,GNR...]
.SH SYNOPSIS 
.B mysqld_multi  
.RB [ --config-file=... ] 
.RB [ --example  ] 
.RB [ --help  ] 
.RB [ --log=...  ] 
.RB [ --mysqladmin=...  ] 
.RB [ --mysqld=...  ] 
.RB [ --no-log  ] 
.RB [ --password=... ] 
.RB [ --tcp-ip  ] 
.RB [ --user=...  ] 
.RB [ --version  ] 
.SH DESCRIPTION 
.TP
.BR mysqld_multi 
.TP
.BR --config-file=...
Alternative config file. NOTE: This will not affect this program\'s own options (group [mysqld_multi]), but only groups [mysqld#]. Without this option everything will be searched from the ordinary my.cnf file. 
.TP
.BR --example 
Give an example of a config file. 
.TP
.BR --help 
Print this help and exit. 
.TP
.BR --log=... 
Log file. Full path to and the name for the log file. NOTE: If the file exists, everything will be appended. 
.TP
.BR --mysqladmin=... 
mysqladmin binary to be used for a server shutdown. 
.TP
.BR --mysqld=... 
mysqld binary to be used. Note that you can give safe_mysqld to this option also. The options are passed to mysqld. Just make sure you have mysqld in your environment variable PATH or fix safe_mysqld. 
.TP
.BR --no-log 
Print to stdout instead of the log file. By default the log file is turned on. 
.TP
.BR --password=...
Password for user for mysqladmin. 
.TP
.BR --tcp-ip 
Connect to the MySQL server(s) via the TCP/IP port instead of the UNIX socket. This affects stopping and reporting. If a socket file is missing, the server may still be running, but can be accessed only via the TCP/IP port. By default connecting is done via the UNIX socket. 
.TP
.BR --user=... 
MySQL user for mysqladmin. 
.TP
.BR --version 
Print the version number and exit. 
.SH NOTE 
Please see the mysql manual for more detailed information on this.



.SH "SEE ALSO" 

isamchk (1),
isamlog (1),
mysqlaccess (1),
mysqladmin (1),
mysqlbug (1),
mysqld (1),
mysqldump (1),
mysqlshow (1),
msql2mysql (1),
perror (1),
replace (1),
safe_mysqld (1),
which1 (1),
zap (1),

.SH AUTHOR 

Ver 1.0, distribution 3.23.29a
Michael (Monty) Widenius (monty@tcx.se),
TCX Datakonsult AB (http://www.tcx.se).
This software comes with no warranty.
Manual page by L. (Kill-9) Pedersen 
(kill-9@kill-9.dk), Mercurmedia Data Model Architect /
system developer (http://www.mercurmedia.com)


.\" end of man page


