.TH REPLACE 1 "20 December 2000" 
.SH NAME 
.TP
replace - A utility program that is used by msql2mysql, but that has more general applicability as well. replace changes strings in place in files or on the standard input. Uses a finite state machine to match longer strings first. Can be used to swap strings.
.SH USAGE 
replace [-?svIV] from to from to ... -- [files]
.TP
or
.TP
replace [-?svIV] from to from to ... < fromfile > tofile
.SH SYNOPSIS 
.B replace 
.RB [ -?  |  -I ] 
.RB [ -s ] 
.RB [ -v ] 
.SH DESCRIPTION 
.TP
.BR replace
.TP
.BR -?  |  -I
info
.TP
.BR -s
silent
.TP
.BR -v
verbose
.SH EXTRA INFO
.B Special characters in from string:
.TP
\\^
Match start of line.
.TP
\\$
Match end of line.
.TP
\\b
Match space-character, start of line or end of line. For a end \\b the next replace starts locking at the end space-character. A \\b alone in a string matches only a space-character.
.SH EXAMPLE
this command swaps a and b in the given files:
.TP
shell> replace a b b a -- file1 file2 ...
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
isamchk (1),
isamlog (1),
mysqlaccess (1),
mysqladmin (1),
mysqlbug (1),
mysqld (1),
mysqldump (1),
mysqlshow (1),
msql2mysql (1),
perror (1),
replace (1),
mysqld_safe (1),
which1 (1),
zap (1),
.SH AUTHOR 
Ver 1.0, distribution 3.23.29a
Michael (Monty) Widenius (monty@tcx.se),
TCX Datakonsult AB (http://www.tcx.se).
This software comes with no warranty.
Manual page by L. (Kill-9) Pedersen 
(kill-9@kill-9.dk), Mercurmedia Data Model Architect /
system developer (http://www.mercurmedia.com)
.\" end of man page


