.TH SAFE_MYSQLD	  1 "19 December 2000"
.SH NAME
.BR safe_mysqld
is the recommended way to start a mysqld daemon on Unix. safe_mysqld adds some safety features such as restarting the server when an error occurs and logging run-time information to a log file. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B safe_mysqld
.RB [ \-\-basedir=\fP\fIpath\fP ]
.RB [ \-\-core\-file\-size=# ]
.RB [ \-\-defaults\-extra\-file=\fP\fIpath\fP ]
.RB [ \-\-defaults\-file=\fP\fIpath\fP ]
.RB [ \-\-open\-files=# ]
.RB [ \-\-datadir=\fP\fIpath\fP ]
.RB [ \-\-err\-log=\fP\fIpath \fP]
.RB [ \-\-ledir=path ]
.RB [ \-\-log=\fP\fIpath\fP ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-defaults ]
.RB [ \-\-open\-files=# ]
.RB [ \-\-pid\-file=\fP\fIpath\fP ]
.RB [ \-\-port=# ]
.RB [ \-\-socket=\fP\fIpath\fP ]
.RB [ \-\-timezone=# ]
.RB [ \-\-user=# ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP 
.BR \-\-basedir=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-core\-file\-size=# 
.TP 
.BR \-\-defaults\-extra\-file=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-defaults\-file=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-open\-files=# 
Size of the core file mysqld should be able to create. Passed to ulimit \-c. 
.TP 
.BR \-\-datadir=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-err\-log=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-ledir=\fP\fIpath \fP
Path to mysqld 
.TP 
.BR \-\-log=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-no\-defaults 
.TP 
.BR \-\-open\-files=# 
Number of files mysqld should be able to open. Passed to ulimit \-n. 
.TP 
.BR \-\-pid\-file=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-port=# 
.TP 
.BR \-\-socket=\fP\fIpath \fP
.TP 
.BR \-\-timezone=# 
Set the timezone (the TZ) variable to the value of this parameter. 
.TP 
.BR \-\-user=# 
.SH NOTE
Note that all options on the command line to safe_mysqld are passed to mysqld. If you wants to use any options in safe_mysqld that mysqld doesn't support, you must specify these in the option file. 
.SH "SEE ALSO"
isamchk (1),
isamlog (1),
mysqlaccess (1),
mysqladmin (1),
mysqlbug (1),
mysqld (1),
mysqldump (1),
mysqlshow (1),
msql2mysql (1),
perror (1),
replace (1),
safe_mysqld (1),
which1 (1),
zap (1),
.SH AUTHOR
Ver 1.0, distribution 3.23.29a
Michael (Monty) Widenius (monty@tcx.se),
TCX Datakonsult AB (http://www.tcx.se).
This software comes with no warranty.
Manual page by L. (Kill-9) Pedersen 
(kill-9@kill\-9.dk), Mercurmedia Data Model Architect /
system developer (http://www.mercurmedia.com)

.\" end of man page
