.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Tokutek.  All Rights Reserved.
.TH DB_ENV->close 3 "November 2007" Tokutek "TokuDB Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
DB_ENV->close
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
\fB #include <db.h>
.br
.sp
.HP 13
.BI "int DB_ENV->close(DB_ENV *" dbenv ", u_int32_t " flags ");"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Closes \fIenv\fR, a TokuDB environment, freeing any allocated resources and closing any underlying subystems.

Close all databases, cursors, and abort or commit all transactions
that refer the environment before closing the environment.

Do not use the environment after closing it (even if the close
operation returns some sort of failure).  Its underlying memory is
likely to have been \fBfree()\fR'd.

.SH PARAMETERS
.IP \fIdbenv
The environment.  The \fBDB_ENV->close()\fR environment does something like \fBfree(\fIdbenv\fB)\fR as part of its operation.

.IP \fIflags
The \fIflags\fR parameter must be set to 0.

.SH RETURN VALUE
.LP
Returns zero on success, and nonzero on failure.
.SH CONFORMING TO
The TokuDB embedded database provides a subset of the functionality of
the Berkeley DB.  Programs that work with TokuDB probably work with
with most versions of Berkeley DB with only recompilation or
relinking.  The database files are incompatible, however, so to
convert from one library to the other you would need to dump the
database with one library's tool and load it with the other's.
.SH AUTHOR
Tokutek, Inc.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2007 Tokutek.  All Rights Reserved.
