.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Tokutek.  All Rights Reserved.
.TH DB_ENV->open 3 "November 2007" Tokutek "TokuDB Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
DB_ENV->open
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
\fB #include <db.h>
.br
.sp
.HP 13
.BI "int DB_ENV->open(DB_ENV *" dbenv ", char *" db_home ", u_int32_t " flags " int " mode ");"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Open a TokuDB environment (which should previously have been created using \fBdb_env_create\fR, and which should eventually be closed using \fBDB_env->close()\fR.

.SH PARAMETERS
.IP \fIdbenv
The environment.

.IP \fIdb_home
The name of the environment's directory if non-\fBNULL\fR.  Can be
either a relative pathame (relative to the current working directory),
or an absolute pathname.

if \fidb_home\fR is \fBNULL\fR and the \fBDB_USE_ENVIRON\fR or \fBDB_USE_ENVIRON_ROOT\fB flag is set, then the value of the 
\fBDB_HOME\fR environment variable is used.

.IP \fIflags
The \fIflags\fR parameter must be set to 0 or the bitwise or of one or more of the following values:
..RS 4
.IP \fBDB_INIT_LOCK
.IP \fBDB_INIT_LOG
.IP \fBDB_INIT_MPOOL
.IP \fBDB_INIT_TXN
.IP \fBDB_RECOVER
.IP \fBDB_RECOVER_FATAL
.IP \fBDB_USE_ENVIRON
.IP \fBDB_USE_ENVIRON_ROOT
.IP \fBDB_CREATE
.IP \fBDB_PRIVATE
.IP \fBDB_THREAD


.SH RETURN VALUE
.LP
Returns zero on success, and nonzero on failure.
.SH CONFORMING TO
The TokuDB embedded database provides a subset of the functionality of
the Berkeley DB.  Programs that work with TokuDB probably work with
with most versions of Berkeley DB with only recompilation or
relinking.  The database files are incompatible, however, so to
convert from one library to the other you would need to dump the
database with one library's tool and load it with the other's.
.SH AUTHOR
Tokutek, Inc.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2007 Tokutek.  All Rights Reserved.
