.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Tokutek.  All Rights Reserved.
.TH tokudb_gen 1 "November 2007" Tokutek "TokuDB Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
tokudb_gen
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tokudb_gen [-PpTuVhHfF] [-o
.I output
.B ] [-r
.I seed
.B ] [-m
.I minsize
.B ] [-M
.I limitsize
.B ] [-n
.I numpairs
.B ] [-d
.I delimiter
.B ] [-s
.I delimiter
.B ]
.LP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B tokudb_gen
program generates random key/data pairs onto the standard output that match
the input requirements of the
.B tokudb_load
program and the output requirements of the
.B tokudb_dump
program.
.SH CONFORMING TO
The TokuDB embedded database provides a subset of the functionality of
the Berkeley DB.  Programs that work with TokuDB probably work with
with most versions of Berkeley DB with only recompilation or
relinking.  The database files are incompatible, however, so to
convert from one library to the other you would need to dump the
database with one library's tool and load it with the other's.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -P
Generate only printable characters (as defined by
.B isprint
).
.IP -p
Output in the same format as
.B tokudb_dump
-p.
Output in the same format as
.B tokudb_dump
-T (and the input format for 
.B tokudb_load
-T.)
.IP -u
Disable forcing of unique keys.  By default a unique identifier is appended
to the end of every key to make certain they are unique, which may allow
keys greater than the lengthlimit provided by -M.  Setting -u will enforce
the length limit strictly, and might result in duplicate keys.
.IP -V
Print version information and exit.
.IP -h
Prevent output of header information.
.IP -H
Output ONLY the header information.
.IP -f
Prevent output of footer information.
.IP -F
Output ONLY the footer information.
.IP "-o output"
Write generated data to output instead of standard out.
.IP "-r seed"
Set the random seed for reproducible results.  Default seed is 1.
.IP "-m minsize"
Set the minimum size (inclusive) for keys and values.  Default is 0.
.IP "-M limitsize"
Set the maximum size (exclusive) for keys and values.  Default is 1024.
Note that if -u is not provided, a unique identifier is appended to all keys
which can cause key sizes to exceed limitsize by up to 10 bytes.
Value size limits are enforced strictly.
.IP "-n numpairs"
The number of key/value pairs to generate.
Default is 1024.
.IP "-d delimiter"
A delimiter placed at the end of every key and value.
Default is '\n'.  It must be either a single character or any of the following
escape sequences: \\a, \\b, \\e, \\f, \\n, \\r, \\t, \\v, \\0, or \\\\.  The delimiter
may not be a hexadecimal character.
.IP "-s delimiter"
A delimiter placed placed at the end of every key/value pair.
There is no default if omitted.
It has the same restrictions as -d.
.SH AUTHOR
Tokutek, Inc.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2007 Tokutek.  All Rights Reserved.
