.TH WHICH 1 "20 December 2000" 
.SH NAME 
which - Jani please supply one. 
.SH USAGE 
which [options] [--] programname [...]
.SH SYNOPSIS 
.B which 
.RB [ \-\-version | \-[vV] ] 
.RB [ \-\-skip\-dot ] 
.RB [ \-\-skip\-tilde ] 
.RB [ \-\-show\-dot ] 
.RB [ \-\-show\-tilde ] 
.RB [ \-\-tty\-only ] 
.RB [ \-\-all | \-a ] 
.RB [ \-\-read\-alias | \-i ] 
.RB [ \-\-skip\-alias ] 
.SH DESCRIPTION 
.TP
.BR which
supports by executing
.TP
.BR \-\-version | \-[vV]
Print version and exit successfully.
.TP
.BR \-\-skip\-dot
Skip directories in PATH that start with a dot.
.TP
.BR \-\-skip\-tilde
Skip directories in PATH that start with a tilde.
.TP
.BR \-\-show\-dot
Don\'t expand a dot to current directory in output.
.TP
.BR \-\-show\-tilde
Output a tilde for HOME directory for non-root.
.TP
.BR \-\-tty\-only 
Stop processing options on the right if not on tty.
.TP
.BR \-\-all | \-a 
Print all matches in PATH, not just the first
.TP
.BR \-\-read\-alias | \-i
Read list of aliases from stdin.
.TP
.BR \-\-skip\-alias
Ignore option 
.BR --read-alias; 
don\'t read stdin.
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
isamchk (1), isamlog (1), mysqlaccess (1), mysqladmin (1), mysqlbug (1), mysqld (1), mysqldump (1), mysqlshow (1), msql2mysql (1), perror (1), replace (1), mysqld_safe (1), which1 (1), zap (1),
.SH AUTHOR 
Ver 1.0, distribution 3.23.29a Michael (Monty) Widenius (monty@tcx.se), TCX Datakonsult AB (http://www.tcx.se). This software comes with no warranty. Manual page by L. (Kill-9) Pedersen (kill-9@kill-9.dk), Mercurmedia Data Model Architect / system developer (http://www.mercurmedia.com) 
.\" end of man page 