.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\"    1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"       the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"       distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: July 15 2022 $
.Dt ES384_PK_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm es384_pk_new ,
.Nm es384_pk_free ,
.Nm es384_pk_from_EC_KEY ,
.Nm es384_pk_from_EVP_PKEY ,
.Nm es384_pk_from_ptr ,
.Nm es384_pk_to_EVP_PKEY
.Nd FIDO2 COSE ES384 API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In openssl/ec.h
.In fido/es384.h
.Ft es384_pk_t *
.Fn es384_pk_new "void"
.Ft void
.Fn es384_pk_free "es384_pk_t **pkp"
.Ft int
.Fn es384_pk_from_EC_KEY "es384_pk_t *pk" "const EC_KEY *ec"
.Ft int
.Fn es384_pk_from_EVP_PKEY "es384_pk_t *pk" "const EVP_PKEY *pkey"
.Ft int
.Fn es384_pk_from_ptr "es384_pk_t *pk" "const void *ptr" "size_t len"
.Ft EVP_PKEY *
.Fn es384_pk_to_EVP_PKEY "const es384_pk_t *pk"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
ES384 is the name given in the CBOR Object Signing and Encryption
(COSE) RFC to ECDSA over P-384 with SHA-384.
The COSE ES384 API of
.Em libfido2
is an auxiliary API with routines to convert between the different
ECDSA public key types used in
.Em libfido2
and
.Em OpenSSL .
.Pp
In
.Em libfido2 ,
ES384 public keys are abstracted by the
.Vt es384_pk_t
type.
.Pp
The
.Fn es384_pk_new
function returns a pointer to a newly allocated, empty
.Vt es384_pk_t
type.
If memory cannot be allocated, NULL is returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn es384_pk_free
function releases the memory backing
.Fa *pkp ,
where
.Fa *pkp
must have been previously allocated by
.Fn es384_pk_new .
On return,
.Fa *pkp
is set to NULL.
Either
.Fa pkp
or
.Fa *pkp
may be NULL, in which case
.Fn es384_pk_free
is a NOP.
.Pp
The
.Fn es384_pk_from_EC_KEY
function fills
.Fa pk
with the contents of
.Fa ec .
No references to
.Fa ec
are kept.
.Pp
The
.Fn es384_pk_from_EVP_PKEY
function fills
.Fa pk
with the contents of
.Fa pkey .
No references to
.Fa pkey
are kept.
.Pp
The
.Fn es384_pk_from_ptr
function fills
.Fa pk
with the contents of
.Fa ptr ,
where
.Fa ptr
points to
.Fa len
bytes.
The
.Fa ptr
pointer may point to an uncompressed point, or to the
concatenation of the x and y coordinates.
No references to
.Fa ptr
are kept.
.Pp
The
.Fn es384_pk_to_EVP_PKEY
function converts
.Fa pk
to a newly allocated
.Fa EVP_PKEY
type with a reference count of 1.
No internal references to the returned pointer are kept.
If an error occurs,
.Fn es384_pk_to_EVP_PKEY
returns NULL.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn es384_pk_from_EC_KEY ,
.Fn es384_pk_from_EVP_PKEY ,
and
.Fn es384_pk_from_ptr
functions return
.Dv FIDO_OK
on success.
On error, a different error code defined in
.In fido/err.h
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr eddsa_pk_new 3 ,
.Xr es256_pk_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_assert_verify 3 ,
.Xr fido_cred_pubkey_ptr 3 ,
.Xr rs256_pk_new 3
