.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\"    1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"       the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"       distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 25 2018 $
.Dt FIDO_STRERR 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_strerr
.Nd FIDO2 error codes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In fido.h
.Ft const char *
.Fn fido_strerr "int n"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fido_strerr
function translates the error code
.Fa n
into a readable string,
where
.Fa n
is an error code defined in
.In fido/err.h .
.Fn fido_strerr
never returns NULL.
Returned pointers point to static strings.
