.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style
.\" license that can be found in the LICENSE file.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 23 2018 $
.Dt FIDO_CRED_VERIFY 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_cred_verify
.Nd verifies the attestation signature of a FIDO 2 credential
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In fido.h
.Ft int
.Fn fido_cred_verify "const fido_cred_t *cred"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fido_cred_verify
function verifies whether the attestation signature contained in
.Fa cred
matches the attributes of the credential.
Before using
.Fn fido_cred_verify
in a sensitive context, the reader is strongly encouraged to make
herself familiar with the FIDO 2 credential attestation process
as defined in the Web Authentication (webauthn) standard.
.Pp
A brief description follows:
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_cred_verify
function verifies whether the client data hash, relying party ID,
credential ID, type, and resident/discoverable key and user verification
attributes of
.Fa cred
have been attested by the holder of the private counterpart of
the public key contained in the credential's x509 certificate.
.Pp
Please note that the x509 certificate itself is not verified.
.Pp
The attestation statement formats supported by
.Fn fido_cred_verify
are
.Em packed
and
.Em fido-u2f .
The attestation type implemented by
.Fn fido_cred_verify
is
.Em Basic Attestation .
The attestation key pair is assumed to be of the type ES256.
Other attestation formats and types are not supported.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The error codes returned by
.Fn fido_cred_verify
are defined in
.In fido/err.h .
If
.Fa cred
does not contain attestation data, then
.Dv FIDO_ERR_INVALID_ARGUMENT
is returned.
If
.Fa cred
passes verification, then
.Dv FIDO_OK
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_cred_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_cred_set_authdata 3
