.\" Copyright (c) 2019 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\"    1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"       the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"       distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 13 2019 $
.Dt FIDO_BIO_INFO_NEW 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_bio_info_new ,
.Nm fido_bio_info_free ,
.Nm fido_bio_info_type ,
.Nm fido_bio_info_max_samples
.Nd FIDO2 biometric sensor information API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In fido.h
.In fido/bio.h
.Ft fido_bio_info_t *
.Fn fido_bio_info_new "void"
.Ft void
.Fn fido_bio_info_free "fido_bio_info_t **info_p"
.Ft uint8_t
.Fn fido_bio_info_type "const fido_bio_info_t *info"
.Ft uint8_t
.Fn fido_bio_info_max_samples "const fido_bio_info_t *info"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Biometric sensor metadata is abstracted in
.Em libfido2
by the
.Vt fido_bio_info_t
type.
.Pp
The functions described in this page allow a
.Vt fido_bio_info_t
type to be allocated, deallocated, and inspected.
For device operations on
.Vt fido_bio_info_t ,
please refer to
.Xr fido_bio_dev_get_info 3 .
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_new
function returns a pointer to a newly allocated, empty
.Vt fido_bio_info_t
type.
If memory cannot be allocated, NULL is returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_free
function releases the memory backing
.Fa *info_p ,
where
.Fa *info_p
must have been previously allocated by
.Fn fido_bio_info_new .
On return,
.Fa *info_p
is set to NULL.
Either
.Fa info_p
or
.Fa *info_p
may be NULL, in which case
.Fn fido_bio_info_free
is a NOP.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_type
function returns the fingerprint sensor type, which is
.Dv 1
for touch sensors, and
.Dv 2
for swipe sensors.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_bio_info_max_samples
function returns the maximum number of successful samples
required for enrollment.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_bio_dev_get_info 3 ,
.Xr fido_bio_enroll_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_bio_template 3
