.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\"    1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"       the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"       distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: May 25 2018 $
.Dt FIDO_INIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_init ,
.Nm fido_set_log_handler
.Nd initialise the FIDO2 library
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In fido.h
.Bd -literal
typedef void fido_log_handler_t(const char *);
.Ed
.Pp
.Ft void
.Fn fido_init "int flags"
.Ft void
.Fn fido_set_log_handler "fido_log_handler_t *handler"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fido_init
function initialises the
.Em libfido2
library.
Its invocation must precede that of any other
.Em libfido2
function in the context of the executing thread.
.Pp
If
.Dv FIDO_DEBUG
is set in
.Fa flags ,
then
debug output will be emitted by
.Em libfido2
on
.Em stderr .
Alternatively, the
.Ev FIDO_DEBUG
environment variable may be set.
.Pp
If
.Dv FIDO_DISABLE_U2F_FALLBACK
is set in
.Fa flags ,
then
.Em libfido2
will not fallback to U2F in
.Xr fido_dev_open 3
if a device claims to support FIDO2 but fails to respond to
a CTAP 2.0 greeting.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_set_log_handler
function causes
.Fa handler
to be called for each log line generated in the context of the
executing thread.
Lines passed to
.Fa handler
include a trailing newline character and are not printed by
.Em libfido2
on
.Em stderr .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_assert_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_cred_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_dev_info_manifest 3 ,
.Xr fido_dev_open 3
