.\" Copyright (c) 2018-2022 Yubico AB. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\"    1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"       notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"       the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"       distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 2 2022 $
.Dt FIDO_CRED_EXCLUDE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fido_cred_exclude ,
.Nm fido_cred_empty_exclude_list
.Nd manage exclude lists in a FIDO2 credential
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In fido.h
.Ft int
.Fn fido_cred_exclude "fido_cred_t *cred" "const unsigned char *ptr" "size_t len"
.Ft int
.Fn fido_cred_empty_exclude_list "fido_cred_t *cred"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn fido_cred_exclude
function adds
.Fa ptr
to the list of credentials excluded by
.Fa cred ,
where
.Fa ptr
points to a credential ID of
.Fa len
bytes.
A copy of
.Fa ptr
is made, and no references to the passed pointer are kept.
If
.Fn fido_cred_exclude
fails, the existing list of excluded credentials is preserved.
.Pp
If
.Nm
returns success and
.Fa cred
is later passed to
.Xr fido_dev_make_cred 3
on a device that contains the credential
denoted by
.Fa ptr ,
then
.Xr fido_dev_make_cred 3
will fail.
.Pp
For the format of a FIDO2 credential ID, please refer to the
Web Authentication (webauthn) standard.
.Pp
The
.Fn fido_cred_empty_exclude_list
function empties the list of credentials excluded by
.Fa cred .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The error codes returned by
.Fn fido_cred_exclude
and
.Fn fido_cred_empty_exclude_list
are defined in
.In fido/err.h .
On success,
.Dv FIDO_OK
is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fido_cred_new 3 ,
.Xr fido_cred_set_authdata 3 ,
.Xr fido_dev_make_cred 3
