@c FIX AGL 20011108 Extracted from manual.texi.
@c Contains links to MySQL related info (books, articles). To web portals!


@node MySQL-Books, General-SQL, Questions, MySQL Information Sources
@subsection Books About MySQL

For the latest book information, with user comments, please visit
@uref{http://www.mysql.com/portal/books/html/}.

While this manual is still the right place for up to date technical
information, its primary goal is to contain everything there is to know
about MySQL.  It is sometimes nice to have a bound book to read
in bed or while you travel.  Here is a list of books about MySQL and
related subjects (in English).

By purchasing a book through these hyperlinks provided herein, you are
contributing to the development of MySQL.

@emph{MySQL}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available	@tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0735709211&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher	@tab		New Riders
@item Author	@tab		Paul DuBois
@item Pub Date	@tab		1st Edition December 1999
@item ISBN	@tab		0735709211
@item Pages	@tab		800
@item Price	@tab		$49.99 US
@item Downloadable examples  @tab
 @uref{http://www.kitebird.com/mysql-book/} (@code{samp_db} distribution)
@item Errata  @tab
@uref{http://www.kitebird.com/mysql-book/errata.html}
@end multitable

Foreword by Michael ``Monty'' Widenius, MySQL Moderator.
@*

In @emph{MySQL}, Paul DuBois provides you with a comprehensive guide to
one of the most popular relational database systems.  Paul has
contributed to the online documentation for MySQL and is an
active member of the MySQL community.  The principal MySQL
developer, Monty Widenius, and a network of his fellow developers
reviewed the manuscript, and provided Paul with the kind of insight
no one else could supply.
@*

Instead of merely giving you a general overview of MySQL, Paul
teaches you how to make the most of its capabilities.  Through two
sample database applications that run throughout the book, he
gives you solutions to problems you're sure to face.  He helps you
integrate MySQL efficiently with third-party tools, such as PHP
and Perl, enabling you to generate dynamic Web pages through
database queries.  He teaches you to write programs that access
MySQL databases, and also provides a comprehensive set of
references to column types, operators, functions, SQL syntax,
MySQL programming, C API, Perl @code{DBI}, and PHP API.
@emph{MySQL} simply gives you the kind of information you won't find
anywhere else.
@*

If you use MySQL, this book provides you with:
@itemize @bullet
@item
An introduction to MySQL and SQL.
@item
Coverage of MySQL's data types and how to use them.
@item
Thorough treatment of how to write client programs in C.
@item
A guide to using the Perl @code{DBI} and PHP APIs for developing
command-line and Web-based applications.
@item
Tips on administrative issues such as user accounts, backup,
crash recovery, and security.
@item
Help in choosing an ISP for MySQL access.
@item
A comprehensive reference for MySQL's data types, operators,
functions, and SQL statements and utilities.
@item
Complete reference guides for MySQL's C API, the Perl @code{DBI} API,
and PHP's MySQL-related functions.
@end itemize
@*

@emph{MySQL & mSQL}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available	@tab		@uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=1565924347&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher	@tab		O'Reilly
@item Authors	@tab		Randy Jay Yarger, George Reese & Tim King
@item Pub Date	@tab		1st Edition July 1999
@item ISBN	@tab		1-56592-434-7, Order Number: 4347
@item Pages	@tab		506
@item Price	@tab		$34.95
@end multitable

This book teaches you how to use MySQL and @code{mSQL}, two popular
and robust database products that support key subsets of SQL on both Linux
and Unix systems.  Anyone who knows basic C, Java, Perl, or Python can
write a program to interact with a database, either as a stand-alone
application or through a Web page.  This book takes you through the
whole process, from installation and configuration to programming
interfaces and basic administration.  Includes plenty of tutorial
material.
@*

@emph{Sams' Teach Yourself MySQL in 21 Days}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0672319144&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Sams
@item Authors   @tab            Mark Maslakowski and Tony Butcher
@item Pub Date  @tab            June 2000
@item ISBN      @tab            0672319144
@item Pages     @tab            650
@item Price     @tab            $39.99
@end multitable

Sams' @emph{Teach Yourself MySQL in 21 Days} is for intermediate Linux users
who want to move into databases.  A large share of the audience is Web 
developers who need a database to store large amounts of information that 
can be retrieved via the Web.

Sams' @emph{Teach Yourself MySQL in 21 Days} is a practical, step-by-step
tutorial.  The reader will learn to design and employ this open source
database technology into his or her website using practical, hands-on 
examples to follow.
@*

@emph{E-Commerce Solutions with MySQL}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0761524452&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Prima Communications, Inc.
@item Authors   @tab            N/A
@item Pub Date  @tab            January 2000
@item ISBN      @tab            0761524452
@item Pages     @tab            500
@item Price     @tab            $39.99
@end multitable

No description available.
@*

@emph{MySQL and PHP from Scratch}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0789724405&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Que
@item Authors   @tab            N/A
@item Pub Date  @tab            September 2000
@item ISBN      @tab            0789724405
@item Pages     @tab            550
@item Price     @tab            $34.99
@end multitable

This book puts together information on installing, setting up, and
troubleshooting Apache, MySQL, PHP3, and IMP into one complete
volume.  You also learn how each piece is part of a whole by learning,
step-by-step, how to create a web-based e-mail system.  Learn to run
the equivalent of Active Server Pages (ASP) using PHP3, set up an
e-commerce site using a database and the Apache web server, and create
a data entry system (such as sales, product quality tracking, customer
preferences, etc) that no installation in the PC.
@*

@emph{Professional MySQL Programming}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://shop.barnesandnoble.com/bookSearch/isbnInquiry.asp?isbn=1861005164} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Wrox Press, Inc.
@item Authors   @tab            N/A
@item Pub Date  @tab            Late 2001
@item ISBN      @tab            1861005164
@item Pages     @tab            1000
@item Price     @tab            $49.99
@end multitable

No description available.
@*

@emph{Professional Linux Programming}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=1861003013&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Wrox Press, Inc.
@item Authors   @tab            N/A
@item Pub Date  @tab            September 2000
@item ISBN      @tab            1861003013
@item Pages     @tab            1155
@item Price     @tab            $47.99
@end multitable

In this follow-up to the best-selling @emph{Beginning Linux Programming},
you will learn from the authors' real-world knowledge and experience of
developing software for Linux; you'll be taken through the development
of a sample 'DVD Store' application, with 'theme' chapters addressing
different aspects of its implementation.  Meanwhile, individual
``take-a-break'' chapters cover important topics that go beyond the
bounds of the central theme.  All focus on the practical aspects of
programming, showing how crucial it is to choose the right tools for
the job, use them as they should be used, and get things right first
time.
@*

@emph{PHP and MySQL Web Development}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0672317842&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Sams
@item Authors   @tab            Luke Welling, Laura Thomson
@item Pub Date  @tab            March 2001
@item ISBN      @tab            0672317842
@item Pages     @tab            700
@item Price     @tab            $49.99
@end multitable

@emph{PHP and MySQL Web Development} introduces you to the advantages
of implementing both MySQL and PHP.  These advantages are detailed
through the provision of both statistics and several case studies.  A
practical web application is developed throughout the book, providing
you with the tools necessary to implement a functional online
database.  Each function is developed separately, allowing you the
choice to incorporate only those parts that you would like to
implement.  Programming concepts of the PHP language are highlighted,
including functions which tie MySQL support into a PHP script and
advanced topics regarding table manipulation.
@*

@strong{Books recommended by the MySQL Developers}

@emph{SQL-99 Complete, Really}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0879305681&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            CMP Books
@item Authors   @tab            Peter Gulutzan, Trudy Pelzer
@item Pub Date  @tab            April 1999
@item ISBN      @tab            0879305681
@item Pages     @tab            1104
@item Price     @tab            $55.96
@end multitable

This book contains complete descriptions of the new standards for
syntax, data structures, and retrieval processes of SQL databases.  As
an example-based reference manual, it includes all of the CLI
functions, information, schema tables, and status codes, as well as a
working SQL database provided on the companion disk.
@*

@emph{C, A reference manual}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0133262243&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Prentice Hall
@item Authors   @tab            Samuel P. Harbison, Guy L. Steele
@item Pub Date  @tab            September 1994
@item ISBN      @tab            0133262243
@item Pages     @tab            480
@item Price     @tab            $35.99
@end multitable

A new and improved revision of the bestselling C language
reference.  This manual introduces the notion of "Clean C", writing C
code that can be compiled as a C++ program, C programming style that
emphasizes correctness, portability, maintainability, and
incorporates the ISO C Amendment 1 (1994) which specifies new
facilities for writing portable, international programs in C.
@*

@emph{C++ for Real Programmers}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0120499428&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Academic Press, Incorporated
@item Authors   @tab            Jeff Alger, Jim Keogh
@item Pub Date  @tab            February 1998
@item ISBN      @tab            0120499428
@item Pages     @tab            388
@item Price     @tab            $39.95
@end multitable

@emph{C++ For Real Programmers} bridges the gap between C++ as described
in beginner and intermediate-level books and C++ as it is practiced by
experts.  Numerous valuable techniques are described, organised into
three simple themes: indirection, class hierarchies, and memory
management.  It also provides in-depth coverage of template creation,
exception handling, pointers and optimisation techniques.  The focus of
the book is on ANSI C++ and, as such, is compiler independent. 

@emph{C++ For Real Programmers} is a revision of 
@emph{Secrets of the C++ Masters} and includes a new appendix comparing C++ 
with Java.  The book comes with a 3.5" disk for Windows with source code.
@*

@emph{Algorithms in C}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0201514257&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.
@item Authors   @tab            Robert Sedgewick
@item Pub Date  @tab            April 1990
@item ISBN      @tab            0201514257
@item Pages     @tab            648
@item Price     @tab            $45.75
@end multitable

@emph{Algorithms in C} describes a variety of algorithms in a number of
areas of interest, including: sorting, searching, string-processing, and
geometric, graph and mathematical algorithms.  The book emphasizes
fundamental techniques, providing readers with the tools to confidently 
implement, run, and debug useful algorithms.
@*

@emph{Multithreaded Programming with Pthreads}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=0136807291&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            Prentice Hall
@item Authors   @tab            Bil Lewis, Daniel J. Berg
@item Pub Date  @tab            October 1997
@item ISBN      @tab            0136807291
@item Pages     @tab            432
@item Price     @tab            $34.95
@end multitable

Based on the best-selling @emph{Threads Primer}, 
@emph{Multithreaded Programming with Pthreads} gives you a solid 
understanding of Posix threads: what they are, how they work, when to use 
them, and how to optimise them. It retains the clarity and humor of 
@emph{Threads Primer}, but includes expanded comparisons to Win32 and OS/2
implementations.  Code examples tested on all of the major UNIX platforms 
are featured along with detailed explanations of how and why they use threads.
@*

@emph{Programming the PERL DBI: Database Programming with PERL}
@multitable @columnfractions .3 .7
@item Available @tab            @uref{http://service.bfast.com/bfast/click?bfmid=2181&sourceid=34233559&bfpid=1565926994&bfmtype=book} (Barnes and Noble)
@item Publisher @tab            O'Reilly & Associates, Incorporated
@item Authors   @tab            Alligator Descartes, Tim Bunce
@item Pub Date  @tab            February 2000
@item ISBN      @tab            1565926994
@item Pages     @tab            400
@item Price     @tab            $27.96
@end multitable

@emph{Programming the Perl DBI} is coauthored by Alligator Descartes, one
of the most active members of the DBI community, and by Tim Bunce, the
inventor of DBI.  For the uninitiated, the book explains the architecture
of DBI and shows you how to write DBI-based programs.  For the experienced
DBI dabbler, this book explains DBI's nuances and the peculiarities of each
individual DBD.

The book includes:
@itemize @bullet
@item
An introduction to DBI and its design.
@item
How to construct queries and bind parameters.
@item
Working with database, driver, and statement handles.
@item
Debugging techniques.
@item
Coverage of each existing DBD.
@item
A complete reference to DBI.
@end itemize
@*


@node General-SQL, Useful Links, MySQL-Books, MySQL Information Sources
@subsection General SQL Information and Tutorials

The MySQL book portal is split into different sections to make it easy
to locate books for various purposes.
@uref{http://www.mysql.com/portal/books/html/}

Tutorials can be found at:
@uref{http://www.mysql.com/portal/development/html/development-61-1.html}

@node Useful Links,  , General-SQL, MySQL Information Sources
@subsection Useful MySQL-related Links

The MySQL development portal is the ultimate source of MySQL related
links. @uref{http://www.mysql.com/portal/development/html/}

Apart from the following links, you can find and download a lot of
MySQL programs, tools and APIs in the Contrib directory
(@uref{http://www.mysql.com/Downloads/Contrib/}).
@cindex @code{Contrib} directory

@cindex URLs to MySQL information
@cindex MySQL related information URLs
@subheading Tutorials and Manuals

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://michael.bacarella.com/research/mysqlmyths.html} (MySQL Myths Debunked)
MySQL used in the real world.

@item @uref{http://www.4t2.com/mysql/}
Information about the German MySQL mailing list.

@item @uref{http://www2.rent-a-database.de/mysql/}
MySQL handbook in German.

@item @uref{http://www.bitmover.com:8888/home/bk/mysql/}
Web access to the MySQL BitKeeper repository.

@item @uref{http://www.analysisandsolutions.com/code/mybasic.htm}
Beginners MySQL Tutorial on how to install and set up
MySQL on a Windows machine.

@item @uref{http://www.devshed.com/Server_Side/MySQL/}
A lot of MySQL tutorials.

@item @uref{http://mysql.hitstar.com/}
MySQL manual in Chinese.

@item @uref{http://www.linuxplanet.com/linuxplanet/tutorials/1046/1/}
Setting Up a MySQL-based website.

@item @uref{http://www.hotwired.com/webmonkey/backend/tutorials/tutorial1.html}
MySQL-Perl tutorial.

@item @uref{http://www.iserver.com/support/contrib/perl5/modules.html}
Installing new Perl modules that require locally installed modules.

@item @uref{http://www.hotwired.com/webmonkey/databases/tutorials/tutorial4.html}
PHP/MySQL Tutorial.

@item @uref{http://www.useractive.com/}
Hands on tutorial for MySQL.
@end table

@subheading MySQL Discussion Forums

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.weberdev.com/}
Examples using MySQL; (check Top 20)

@item @uref{http://futurerealm.com/forum/futureforum.htm}
FutureForum Web Discussion Software.
@end table

@subheading Porting MySQL/Using MySQL on Different Systems

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.entropy.ch/software/macosx/mysql/}
Binary of MySQL for Mac OS X Client.  Includes information of how to
build and use MySQL on Mac OS X.

@item @uref{http://xclave.macnn.com/MySQL/}
The Mac OS Xclave.  Running MySQL on Mac OS X.

@item @uref{http://www.prnet.de/RegEx/mysql.html}
MySQL for Mac OS X Server.

@item @uref{http://www.latencyzero.com/macosx/mysql.html}
Building MySQL for Mac OS X.

@item @uref{http://www.essencesw.com/Software/mysqllib.html}
New Client libraries for the Mac OS Classic (Macintosh).

@item @uref{http://www.lilback.com/macsql/}
Client libraries for Mac OS Classic (Macintosh).

@item @uref{http://sixk.maniasys.com/index_en.html}
MySQL for Amiga
@end table

@subheading Perl-related Links

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://dbimysql.photoflux.com/}
Perl DBI with MySQL FAQ.
@end table

@c FIX We should get longer descriptions for things in this category!
@subheading Commercial Applications that Support MySQL

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.supportwizard.com/}
SupportWizard; Interactive helpdesk on the Web. This product includes a
licensed copy of MySQL.

@item @uref{http://www.sonork.com/}
Sonork,  Instant Messenger that is not only Internet oriented.  It's 
focused on private networks and on small to medium companies.  Client
is free, server is free for up to 5 seats.

@item @uref{http://www.stweb.org/}
StWeb - Stratos Web and Application server - An easy-to-use, cross
platform, Internet/Intranet development and deployment system for
development of web-enabled applications.  The standard version of StWeb
has a native interface to MySQL database.

@item @uref{http://www.rightnowtech.com/}
Right Now Web; Web automation for customer service.

@item @uref{http://www.icaap.org/Bazaar/}
Bazaar; Interactive Discussion Forums with Web interface.

@cindex PhoneSweep
@item @uref{http://www.phonesweep.com/}
PhoneSweepT is the world's first commercial Telephone Scanner.  Many break-ins
in recent years have come not through the Internet, but through unauthorised
dial-up modems.  PhoneSweep lets you find these modems by repeatedly placing
phone calls to every phone number that your organisation
controls.  PhoneSweep has a built-in expert system that can recognise
more than 250 different kinds of remote-access programs, including
Carbon Copy(TM), pcANYWHERE(TM), and Windows NT RAS.  All information is stored
in the SQL database.  It then generates a comprehensive report detailing
which services were discovered on which dial-up numbers in your organisation.
@end table

@subheading SQL Clients and Report Writers

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.urbanresearch.com/software/utils/urbsql/} (urSQL)
SQL Editor and Query Utility. Custom syntax highlighting, editable
results grid, exportable result-sets, basic MySQL admin functions,
Etc.. For Windows.

@item @uref{http://www.edatanew.com/} (MySQL Data Manager)
MySQL Data Manager * is platform independent web client
(written in perl) for MySQL server over TCP/IP.

@item @uref{http://ksql.sourceforge.net/}
KDE MySQL client.

@item @uref{http://www.ecker-software.de/}
A Windows GUI client by David Ecker.

@item @uref{http://www.icaap.org/software/kiosk/}
Kiosk; a MySQL client for database management.  Written in Perl.
Will be a part of Bazaar.

@item @uref{http://www.casestudio.com/}
Db design tool that supports MySQL 3.23.

@item @uref{http://home.skif.net/~voland/zeos/eng/}
Zeos - A client that supports MySQL, Interbase and PostgreSQL.

@item @uref{http://www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Ridge/4280/GenericReportWriter/grwhome.html}
A free report writer in Java

@item @uref{http://www.javaframework.de/}
MySQLExport - Export of MySQL create statements and data in a lot of
different formats (SQL, HTML, CVS, text, ZIP, GZIP...).

@item @uref{http://dlabs.4t2.com/}
M2D, a MySQL Administration client for Windows.  M2D supports 
administration of MySQL databases, creation of new databases and 
tables, editing, and more.

@item @uref{http://dlabs.4t2.com/}
Dexter, a small server written in Perl which can be used as a proxy server for
MySQL or as a database extender.

@item @uref{http://www.scibit.com/Products/Software/Utils/Mascon.asp}
Mascon is a powerful Win32 GUI for administering MySQL databases.

@item @uref{http://www.rtlabs.com/}
MacSQL Monitor.  GUI for MySQL, ODBC, and JDBC databases for the Mac OS.
@end table

@subheading Distributions that Include MySQL

@c FIX add the rest (at least a couple more Linuxes)

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.suse.com/}
SuSE Linux (6.1 and above)

@item @uref{http://www.redhat.com/}
RedHat Linux (7.0 and above)

@item @uref{http://distro.conectiva.com.br/}
Conectiva Linux (4.0 and above)
@end table

@subheading Web Development Tools that Support MySQL

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.php.net/}
PHP: A server-side HTML-embedded scripting language.

@item @uref{http://www.midgard-project.org/}
The Midgard Application Server; a powerful Web development environment
based on MySQL and PHP.

@cindex dbServ
@item @uref{http://www.dbServ.de/}
dbServ is an extension to a web server to integrate database output into
your HTML code.  You may use any HTML function in your output.  Only the
client will stop you.  It works as standalone server or as Java servlet.

@item @uref{http://www.chilisoft.com/}
Platform independent ASP from Chili!Soft

@item @uref{http://www.voicenet.com/~zellert/tjFM/}
A JDBC driver for MySQL.

@item @uref{http://www.wernhart.priv.at/php/}
MySQL + PHP demos.

@item @uref{http://www.dbwww.com/}
ForwardSQL: HTML interface to manipulate MySQL databases.

@item @uref{http://www.daa.com.au/~james/www-sql/}
WWW-SQL: Display database information.

@item @uref{http://www.heitml.com/}
HeiTML: A server-side extension of HTML and a 4GL language at the same time.

@item @uref{http://hawkeye.net/}
Hawkeye Internet Server Suite.

@item @uref{http://www.webgroove.com/}
WebGroove Script: HTML compiler and server-side scripting language.

@item @uref{http://www.ihtml.com/}
A server-side website scripting language.

@item @uref{ftp://ftp.igc.apc.org/pub/myodbc/README}
How to use MySQL with ColdFusion on Solaris.

@item @uref{http://calistra.com/MySQL/}
Calistra's ODBC MySQL Administrator.

@item @uref{http://phpclub.net/}
PHPclub - Tips and tricks for PHP.

@item @uref{http://www.widgetchuck.com/}
The Widgetchuck; Website Tools and Gadgets

@item @uref{http://www.adcycle.com/}
AdCycle - advertising management software.

@cindex pwPage
@item @uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/pwpage/}
pwPage - provides an extremely fast and simple approach to the creation 
of database forms.  That is, if a database table exists and an HTML page 
has been constructed using a few simple guidelines, pwPage can be 
immediately used for table data selections, insertions, updates, deletions 
and selectable table content reviewing.

@item @uref{http://www.omnis-software.com/products/studio/studio.html}
OMNIS Studio is a rapid application development (RAD) tool.
@end table

@subheading Database Design Tools with MySQL Support

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.mysql.com/documentation/dezign/}
"DeZign for databases" is a database development tool that uses an
entity relationship diagram (ERD).
@end table

@subheading Web Servers with MySQL Tools

@table @asis
@item @uref{ftp://ftp.kcilink.com/pub/}
mod_auth_mysql, An Apache authentication module.

@item @uref{http://www.roxen.com/}
The Roxen Challenger Web server.
@end table

@subheading Extensions for Other Programs

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.seawood.org/msql_bind/}
MySQL support for BIND (The Internet Domain Name Server).

@item @uref{http://www.inet-interactive.com/sendmail/}
MySQL support for Sendmail and Procmail.
@end table

@subheading Using MySQL with Other Programs

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.iserver.com/support/addonhelp/database/mysql/msaccess.html}
Using MySQL with Access.

@item @uref{http://www.iserver.com/support/contrib/perl5/modules.html}
Installing new Perl modules that require locally installed modules.
@end table

@subheading ODBC-related Links

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.iodbc.org/}
Popular iODBC Driver Manager (libiodbc) now available as Open Source.

@item @uref{http://users.ids.net/~bjepson/freeODBC/}
The FreeODBC Pages.

@item @uref{http://genix.net/unixODBC/}
The unixODBC Project goals are to develop and promote unixODBC to be the
definitive standard for ODBC on the Linux platform.  This is to include GUI
support for KDE.

@item @uref{http://www.sw-soft.com/products/BtrieveODBC/}
A MySQL-based ODBC driver for Btrieve.
@end table

@subheading @strong{API}-related Links

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.jppp.com/}
Partially implemented TDataset-compatible components for MySQL.

@item @uref{http://www.riverstyx.net/qpopmysql/}
qpopmysql - A patch to allow POP3 authentication from a MySQL
database.  There's also a link to Paul Khavkine's patch for Procmail to
allow any MTA to deliver to users in a MySQL database.

@item @uref{http://www.essencesw.com/Software/mysqllib.html}
New Client libraries for the Mac OS Classic (Macintosh).

@item @uref{http://www.lilback.com/macsql/}
Client libraries for the Macintosh.

@item @uref{http://www.essencesw.com/Plugins/mysqlplug.html}
Plugin for REALbasic (for Macintosh)

@item @uref{http://www.iis.ee.ethz.ch/~neeri/macintosh/gusi-qa.html}
A library that emulates BSD sockets and pthreads on Macintosh.  This can
be used if you want to compile the MySQL client library on Mac.
It could probably even be sued to port MySQL to Macintosh, but we
don't know of anyone that has tried that.

@cindex SCMDB
@item @uref{http://www.dedecker.net/jessie/scmdb/}
SCMDB - an add-on for SCM that ports the MySQL C library to scheme
(SCM).  With this library scheme developers can make connections to a
MySQL database and use embedded SQL in their programs.
@end table

@subheading Other MySQL-related Links

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://www.satisoft.com/} (SAT)
The Small Application Toolkit (SAT) is a collection of utilities
intended to simplify the development of small, multi-user, GUI based
applications in a (Microsoft -or- X) Windows Client / Unix Server
environment.

@item @uref{http://www.wix.com/mysql-hosting/}
Registry of Web providers who support MySQL.

@item @uref{http://www.softagency.co.jp/mysql/index.en.html}
Links about using MySQL in Japan/Asia.

@item @uref{http://abattoir.cc.ndsu.nodak.edu/~nem/mysql/udf/}
MySQL UDF Registry.

@item @uref{http://www.open.com.au/products.html}
Commercial Web defect tracking system.

@item @uref{http://www.stonekeep.com/pts/}
PTS: Project Tracking System.

@item @uref{http://tomato.nvgc.vt.edu/~hroberts/mot/}
Job and software tracking system.

@item @uref{http://www.cynergi.net/exportsql/}
ExportSQL: A script to export data from Access95+.

@item @uref{http://SAL.KachinaTech.COM/H/1/MYSQL.html}
SAL (Scientific Applications on Linux) MySQL entry.

@item @uref{http://www.infotech-nj.com/itech/index.shtml}
A consulting company which mentions MySQL in the right company.

@item @uref{http://www.pmpcs.com/}
PMP Computer Solutions.  Database developers using MySQL and
@code{mSQL}.

@item @uref{http://www.dedserius.com/y2kmatrix/}
Y2K tester.
@end table

@subheading SQL and Database Interfaces

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://java.sun.com/products/jdbc/}
The JDBC database access API.

@item @uref{http://www.gagme.com/mysql/}
Patch for @code{mSQL} Tcl.

@item @uref{http://www.amsoft.ru/easysql/}
EasySQL: An ODBC-like driver manager.

@item @uref{http://www.lightlink.com/hessling/rexxsql.html}
A REXX interface to SQL databases.

@c @item @uref{http://www.mytcl.cx/}
@c Tcl interface based on tcl-sql with many bugfixes.

@item @uref{http://www.binevolve.com/~tdarugar/tcl-sql/}
Tcl interface for MySQL.

@item @uref{http://www.contrib.andrew.cmu.edu/~shadow/sql.html}
SQL Reference Page with a lot of interesting links.

@end table

@subheading Examples of MySQL Use

@table @asis
@c Added 990601
@c EMAIL: thuss@little6.com (Todd Huss)
@item @uref{http://www.little6.com/about/linux/}
Little6 Inc., An online contract and job finding site that is powered by
MySQL, PHP3, and Linux.

@c Added 990521
@c EMAIL: info@worldrecords.com (Jim Rota)
@item @uref{http://www.worldrecords.com/}
World Records - A search engine for information about music that uses
MySQL and PHP.

@item @uref{http://www.webtechniques.com/archives/1998/01/note/}
A Contact Database using MySQL and PHP.

@item @uref{http://modems.rosenet.net/mysql/}
Web based interface and Community Calendar with PHP.

@item @uref{http://www.odbsoft.com/cook/sources.htm}
Perl package to generate html from a SQL table structure and for generating
SQL statements from an html form.

@item @uref{http://www.gusnet.cx/proj/telsql/}
Basic telephone database using @code{DBI}/@code{DBD}.

@item @uref{http://tecfa.unige.ch/guides/java/staf2x/ex/jdbc/coffee-break/}
JDBC examples by Daniel K. Schneider.

@item @uref{http://www.ooc.com/}
Object Oriented Concepts Inc; CORBA applications with examples in source.

@c EMAIL: paul@sword.damocles.com (Paul Bannister)
@item @uref{http://www.stopbit.com/}
Stopbit - A technology news site using MySQL and PHP.

@item @uref{http://www.penguinservices.com/scripts/}
Online shopping cart system.

@c Added 990928 from editor@city-gallery.com
@cindex Old Photo Album
@item @uref{http://www.city-gallery.com/album/}
Old Photo Album - The album is a collaborative popular history of photography
project that generates all pages from data stored in a MySQL
database.  Pages are dynamically generated through a php3 interface to the
database content.  Users contribute images and descriptions.  Contributed 
images are stored on the web server to avoid storing them in the database 
as BLOBs.  All other information is stored on the shared MySQL server.
@end table

@subheading General Database Links

@table @asis
@item @uref{http://black.hole-in-the.net/guy/webdb/}
Homepage of the webdb-l (Web Databases) mailing list.

@item @uref{http://www.symbolstone.org/technology/perl/DBI/}
Perl @code{DBI}/@code{DBD} modules homepage.

@item @uref{http://www.student.uni-koeln.de/cygwin/}
Cygwin tools.  Unix on top of Windows.

@cindex Tek-Tips forums
@cindex forums, Tek-Tips
@item @uref{http://www.tek-tips.com/}
Tek-Tips Forums are 800+ independent peer-to-peer non-commercial support
forums for Computer Professionals.  Features include automatic e-mail
notification of responses, a links library, and member confidentiality
guaranteed.

@item @uref{http://www.public.asu.edu/~peterjn/btree/}
B-Trees: Balanced Tree Data Structures.

@item @uref{http://www.fit.qut.edu.au/~maire/baobab/lecture/sld001.htm}
A lecture about B-Trees.
@end table


